hello everyone and welcome to today's
ecosystem panel on
fintech in africa I'm justin a vp of
ecosystem here at the Stellar
development foundation and today I'm
joined by four esteemed colleagues
weeza from chippercache joseph from dfs
lab
rick from click pesa and tori from leaf
rick from ClickPesa and tori from leaf
global
who are all here to discuss the fintech
landscape in africa so they're going to
talk about
the challenges and the opportunities
they see on the continent and in the
world in general
they're going to tell us about their
companies and their personal journey
journeys
and hopefully they'll even share some
advice for budding entrepreneurs
so it's gonna be a fairly
freewheeling discussion but we will do
our best to incorporate audience
questions when possible
so you'll see that there's a q a button
on your screen feel free to use it at
any time to submit a question
before we kick off the discussion though
we will take a few minutes to allow each
panelist to introduce themselves and to
give a little context about who they are
and what they're up to and i'll start as
i mentioned I'm justin from the Stellar
I mentioned I'm justin from the Stellar
development foundation
which is a non-profit organization that
seeks to support the growth and
development of the Stellar network
in order to increase equitable access to
the world's financial infrastructure
so at sdf we believe Stellar has the
potential to have a significant impact
in the world and we've also seen a ton
of interest in Stellar in africa which
is
part of why we're hosting this ecosystem
panel our goal here is to explore the
experiences of aspiring companies that
are delivering digital financial
services across the continent
but also we're seeking to encourage
those companies so in addition to this
panel we're also launching the Stellar
blockchain bootcamp with dfs lab in
september
we'll talk more about that at the end of
the hour so stay tuned
now i've mentioned Stellar a few
times now
to make sure everyone knows what I'm
talking about I'm going to use the rest
of my intro time to give a quick
overview what is Stellar
at a high level Stellar is a
decentralized open network that connects
the world's financial infrastructure
it is a global public blockchain built
for interoperability
and to further financial access and
inclusion and it does that by making
money more fluid
thanks to its speed and scale and
ability to represent and transfer value
it also makes markets more open because
when financial infrastructure is
connected
you have greater geographical and
affordable access to markets
and ultimately it empowers people
because it gives them real ownership
of the value in their possession so
Stellar is a platform that allows
businesses and developers all over the
world to build solutions to real world
problems
and many of the businesses represented
on this panel do just that
they build on Stellar so enough about
Stellar i will
Stellar I will
move on and let each of our panelists
introduce themselves
starting with wiza from chipper cache
over to you
thank you justin hey everyone my name
is wiesa talakasi
i am a malawian living between
I am a malawian living between
nairobi and johannesburg i am the vice
nairobi and johannesburg I am the vice
president of global developer relations
at super cache
triple cash is a mobile wallet
the largest smartphone only mobile
money service
operating on the continent with coverage
across
eight different african geographies as
well as the uk and the united states
and we enable about 4 million users
all of our jurisdictions to send each
other almost a billion dollars
each and every year we've got basic
peer-repair
functionality both local and
international depending on the
jurisdiction that you're in
we also enable users to get
virtual and physical
prepaid debit cards that they can
have tied to their chipper wallet
as well as purchasing some crypto
assets namely bitcoin
ethereum usdc a few more in the
pipeline
as we make our crypto trading
platform a bit more robust
fractional investing in u.s stocks
air time and data bundles across the
board as well as various kinds of bill
payments for their respective
jurisdictions
we're a young company three years old
but we've managed to grow pretty quickly
over the last
year year and a half right now at 160
people
we're building on stella's solutions to
explore
the viability of cross-border settlement
with african
stable coins a lot of the cross-border
trade that takes place in africa is
intermediated
somewhat unnecessarily by the u.s dollar
and we think that we can take advantage
of these
stable coins to facilitate inter africa
trade in a much more efficient and cost
effective way
fantastic thank you next up we have
joseph from dfs
lab joseph yeah hi
thanks justin hi everyone
I'm joseph head of entrepreneur support
at dfs lab
dfs lab is an early stage investor in
companies for custom digital commerce we
typically invest in pre-seed and seed
stage
you know anywhere from twenty five
thousand dollars to fifty thousand
dollars
and we work with founders to help
them understand their markets
help them grow their users and also
help them you know raise bigger
rounds in the future over the last five
years
we've invested in companies like ochova
pula suppliers one pipe and a bunch of
other you know companies
we also run software and capital
which is
at least like basically an angel club
that allows seasoned and new investors
to invest
you know anywhere from 2500 upwards
in companies were also invested in so
yeah
thank you great next up is rick from
click pacer rick thank you
justin hi everyone
my name is rick I'm the co-founder and
director of
click passer click pesa has a company
click passer ClickPesa has a company
operating in east africa
since 2018 we provide a toolbox of
digital tools such as invoicing
crm and e-commerce solutions
combined with payments to smes and
freelancers in east africa
clepasa is active in the market kenya
tanzania and rwanda helping local
businesses perform better
to increase productivity and
profitability
our mission is to simplify doing
business for companies
in or within east africa we've been
building
on stella since 2018 whereby last year
on Stellar since 2018 whereby last year
we became an
anchor on the Stellar network clickbait
is a small company
company around 10 people whereby most of
us
are operating from tanzania and
excited to talk further about Stellar
in this panel looking forward for this
our
thank you fantastic thank you and
finally from leaf global we have tori
tori take it away
thanks justin hi everyone really excited
to be joining the Stellar community
again today you all have been
such a source of support over the years
so happy to be with you
my name is tori samples and I'm the
co-founder and cto of leaf global
fintech
i am based in kigali rwanda and leaf
I am based in kigali rwanda and leaf
currently operates in
rwanda uganda and kenya with goals to
expand across the continent
and into other markets eventually such
as latin america and the middle east and
europe as well
we are a digital wallet that allows
people to safely store and transport
their money across borders
different than other digital wallets
though we we really operate down market
we started with refugees and have
expanded into cross-border traders
and informal merchants people that don't
have access to the formal financial
system
they don't have bank accounts they
probably have a mobile money account if
they're in east africa
but that's fairly limited in that it's
very expensive and difficult to cross
networks and to cross borders
and so leaf allows them to store their
money over time in different currencies
to send and receive peer-to-peer with
friends and family and other countries
for free
and they can cash in and cash out from
any mobile money number and the
countries in which we operate
we've also started adding in things like
airtime purchase
and value-add services into the wallet
and the best part is that it's
accessible over basic phones so you
don't even need a smartphone to use leaf
we use a technology called ussd that
brings the powerful Stellar based
backend you know all built on blockchain
into this really low-tech environment
where people
don't need to know that there's a
blockchain behind the scenes they don't
need to understand crypto to use our
stablecoins
and they don't need to have a smartphone
or data connection
internet connection in order to use our
services
fantastic thanks and thanks to all four
of you for joining i think
of you for joining I think
so at this point we're just going to
sort of move into a discussion and i
think again
anyone who's watching feel free to
submit questions via q a we will
incorporate them into the discussion
when possible
and i think generally you know we're
and I think generally you know we're
here to sort of talk about the finnscape
fintech landscape in africa and to talk
about these solutions
to talk about sort of observations that
the people on the panel have about
what's going on in the world
and and i think i kind of want to
and and I think I kind of want to
start broad
and i think the question that i
and I think the question that i
actually want to start with
is each of you have a product that
incorporates blockchain that targets a
specific
sort of user base how did you identify
that user base
and how did you decide that blockchain
was a good solution to sort of
offer them and i guess i'll i i know
offer them and I guess i'll I know
that this will become a more
freewheeling conversation but
i think to start with i will just call
I think to start with I will just call
on tori
since she was the last to speak sure and
and we might be the most
niche market play of everyone
represented today so happy to start
i mentioned that we started with
I mentioned that we started with
refugees and this became apparent
to my co-founder not robinson and i as
to my co-founder not robinson and I as
we were really digging into the refugee
crisis
before looking at the technology side
so we identified that there was this gap
in the market where
up to 80 of the the cross-border market
in africa is still cash based it's
informal so people are crossing the
border with cash in hand
which can be very dangerous but then it
also is just expensive over time it's
inconvenient
and it doesn't allow people to move into
the formal economy over time so we saw a
significant gap there
and in looking at ways to formalize that
and and to do it with a sustainable
business we saw blockchain as a really
good option
this was early 2018 so the landscape was
a little bit different
but we knew from the bat that or right
off the bat that
bitcoin and ethereum were not going to
be a good fit for what we needed because
we knew that we would be dealing with
small transaction sizes and a customer
base that didn't have
10 minutes to an hour to wait to know
the status of their transaction
and so as we started digging into
different solutions we found Stellar
through a contact of ours actually in
mexico and
and we found that it was a really good
technical fit
and so we we did look at other
blockchains for sure
and eventually found our way back to
sellers started building out the wallet
and during that time it was interesting
to see how the regulatory landscape
changed as well and the attitudes
towards blockchain so if anything i
think over the last few years
it's become an even better fit for us
because
Stellar makes it so much easier to work
with regulators and central banks
because of the stablecoin approach that
we're able to take using our own custom
assets
acting as a by-proxy anchor for our
wallet customer base
so we also we work with licensed
entities to hold and move funds so that
makes it easier as well but
but overall i think the approach was
but overall I think the approach was
identify the problem
identify who it touches and their unique
needs and then find a technical solution
to fit that need
great does anyone else have like i mean
great does anyone else have like I mean
there's there's a lot of interesting
stuff there but
before we sort of move on to talk about
regulatory questions and things like
that
does anyone else have like something
that they can say or
perspective on how they selected their
user base or how they decided to explore
blockchain as a solution for problems
that their users face
how about so let's move in there so
on our side we don't actually
expose a lot of like blockchain
functionalized to our users except for
the assets that
we will we allow them to buy and sell
and send and receive
in the app and we're adding a bunch of
Stellar assets on there very soon
but like it's more of our operational
backend right so
you know in in a good month we'll be
moving anywhere between 80 to maybe 150
million dollars a month across
african currency pairs it is very
expensive to try and do a conversion to
us dollars and then like convert us
dollars back into whatever like
destination currency
that you actually have so like i can
that you actually have so like I can
give you an example one of our most
popular corridors
is uganda and nigeria both ways right
one might not typically imagine that
there's quite a bit of cross-border
trade that takes place
between those two markets but our data
seems to suggest otherwise
so we can find ourselves in a scenario
where
today we have way too much naira in
nigeria
and the other day we have got way too
much ugandan shillings in uganda how do
we quickly move
money around across these currency
pairs such that we
we are not unnecessarily losing money
by
doing unnecessary conversions to the us
dollar at
typically unfavorable rates so you'll
find that like most forex bureaus bureau
de challenge banks
will not have like an exchange rate for
the nigerian
naira to the ugandan shilling but if you
look at stable coin pairs you can find
either a direct the conversion rate
between the two currency pairs
or a currency pair that's like a lot
more cost efficient than
translating to the us dollar
typically something like usdc
so it started making a lot of sense to
us very er
early after encountering encountering
this problem that
stable coins might be the way to go here
the biggest challenge of course has been
around getting
our our partners and we work mostly with
banks in many markets to be able to
move money around getting our bank
partners to have a high degree of
comfort
around stable coins and how those
stable coins are backed
has been a bit of a challenge though
we've been able to make a lot of headway
and i think the future is promising what
and I think the future is promising what
what's
most encouraging for me about it is that
once the regulators and other
stakeholders
start to understand the cost benefits
of using this approach and once they see
some examples at scale
of other countries and other
jurisdictions where there's been a
common sense regulatory framework that
has worked and
has not collapsed or created some degree
of chaos it's very easy for
other countries in the region to adopt
and copy that sort of model and i think
and copy that sort of model and I think
it will
it will be a much more different
landscape in the next three to five
years
across the continent
great i mean yeah
great I mean yeah
yeah for us it's it's been quite
we also don't
really showcase it to the user
as in that since it's a similar
situation and similar reasons
as chipper cache and i believe i
as chipper cache and I believe i
wanted to add there that one of the
reasons we
we chose the Stellar blockchain
is also the i mean obviously the
is also the I mean obviously the
division
of the Stellar
development foundation which we
felt very aligned with but also a lot
of
a lot of action which is also quite
important so
i think sdf has been over the last
I think sdf has been over the last
couple of years
put a lot of effort behind building a
good ecosystem
so whether it be anchors wallets traders
more and more parties are coming to the
ecosystems
and the operations that the Stellar
blockchain offers
therefore are getting quicker and more
efficient and it also makes it cheaper
and that all in a in a decentralized way
one example is for example adding of
the
the usdc
Stellar asset which was added earlier
this year
these are all great developments that
that
make the ecosystem much better which
benefits everyone that interacts with
the ecosystem
and yeah that's only only getting
better so that has also been
one of the reasons for us that we we
went for the Stellar blockchain
great and we're getting some good
questions in the q a too and one of them
sort of touches on something that's come
up a few times which is
basically regulations and the
question from peter is how have the
participants found complying with the
travel rule slash
wire transfer regulations and
demonstrating this to regulators and
banking partners
so question about the travel rule and
wire transfer regulations
are there challenges in complying
with regulations
is that one of the big challenges that
you face
i guess rick maybe just you can answer
I guess rick maybe just you can answer
that one since you're
since you're on the spot still sure
yeah the the countries we are
operating
the cryptocurrency regulation
is all very young and non-existing
so we we've taken quite a pragmatic
approach to it and you do the trial
and error approach so
for us for all use case we are an anchor
on the
on the network issuing
tokens which
people can can
buy or sell and
that that fitted for us in existing
regulation
and yeah
to be able to buy and sell you need a
bank partner
so we also regularly
like sit with them and and see how to
adjust how we how we approach
regulation or or compliance or aml
around this
does anyone else want to speak about
sort of regulatory challenges or just
regulation in general victoria looks
like you're ready
to go sure yeah and only because we get
to have this conversation like five
times a day with
everyone right it's the first thing that
anyone asks about when they hear
what we're doing especially if we
mention refugees just because there's a
stereotype there
but we actually we put all of our
customers through
stringent kyc and aml checks at
onboarding and then
they're able to do transactions
within the system but of course
there are limits on that so i think
there are limits on that so I think
one of one of the advantages of building
in africa
is that widely
there has been some regulatory treatment
of e-money in the last 10 to 15 years
starting with in pesa and kenya and
expanding into mobile money and mobile
banking
across the continent and so when we
approach regulators to say
this is what we're doing this is the
approach that we're taking this is a
digital representation of value
that is stored and held with licensed
financial institutions
in fiat behind the scenes that sounds
familiar to them
because it sounds it fits the framework
that they have for
mobile money for example in east africa
so i think that we've
so I think that we've
we've found a lot of success using that
approach and it's definitely part of our
growth strategy to identify areas that
the regulatory treatment of leaf is
going to be favorable
that's i think that that is changing
that's I think that that is changing
globally
and it's probably going to be a while
before every country has
explicit regulation on blockchain or
crypto based digital wallets but i think
crypto based digital wallets but I think
in the next five years there probably
will be some sort of framework for
e-value generally and so again the
the way that we do that
is is very important for our long-term
success it's not just
because there's a framework here or
anyone can succeed i mean we've put
anyone can succeed I mean we've put
a lot of thought and intention into the
design to make it work for the existing
frameworks
the potential for change over time and
and working within the maybe informal
political relationships of the existing
landscape because
it doesn't at the end of the day it
might not matter only what the law says
it matters who's already in the space
and and how
what they're doing how they're being
treated and so making sure that we can
play nicely with
licensed commercial banks telcos
psps payment providers or payment
processors that's all very important to
us and so our our solution is very much
meant to play nicely so that we can get
traction with existing financial
institutions and regulators because if
it only works
at the tech layer and it doesn't work in
the real world then it doesn't work at
all
so i think that's that's been our our
so I think that's that's been our our
approach and all of that and it seems to
be working well so far at least in
east africa
yeah so just to follow up on you know
tory and rick
I'm was seeing like more
well i say kind of opening up rights of
well I say kind of opening up rights of
regulators
so in nigeria where i live
so in nigeria where I live
for example there was the brush you
know
kind of ban on just general crypto
activities
and almost an extent of you know
making it almost
in a way criminal but then earlier
this month we've seen the cba and the
central bank say
you know they're working on you know
a central bank digital currency
which is which to me is kind of positive
it's
to me it's it seems to be like there's
some engagement with stakeholders
and then they're beginning to understand
you know how this works
and i expect that we'll continue to
and I expect that we'll continue to
see that across
you know multiple governments across
the continents
it might not be like easy over like
and as smooth as we would expect it to
be especially in countries where
you don't have the framework of mobile
money or a money
you know for context right and so
well i i believe it's going to be with
well I believe it's going to be with
with the work that is being done by
you know most lots of the companies like
chipakash
global will you know will probably see
more friendliness from
from regulators over the coming years
without any insights on regulatory
compliance
and the challenges involved hopes plans
dreams
yeah i guess there's two parts
yeah I guess there's two parts
i'd want to think about the first was in
reference to like the travel rule
so we've been fortunate enough that like
a lot of our
transactions for under the fincen
threshold limit which was previously i
think three thousand dollars is now
being
proposed to be as low as 250
a lot of our transactions are typically
below that amount but higher in
frequency
so you know you don't have to
be as stringent when following that
though we do have like the
infrastructure in place to be able to
pass on all of the relevant
parameters regarding the transaction so
you know the address the name
transaction amount the stated purpose
etc so we can pass that programmatically
as parameters to our payment partners
when they're processing so they have a
record
of all of these informations as and
when the transactions are taking place
so it's actually not that hard in terms
of you know being compliant
what is challenging is that the
regulatory frameworks are you know
highly fragmented across markets
so you need to set up like a separate
compliance structure
in each and every country like of the
160 people that are working at your
broadcast today
about 60 of them are in the legal risk
and compliance team
and and you know this is like a very
software heavy
service like we've got like 40 engineers
so you can imagine how
seriously we take that and we found
that like you know
engaging the regulator early a lot of
the times we have this almost
perspective that
the regulator is not pro innovation they
want things to say the certain way or
that they don't understand
i think that's not the right attitude to
I think that's not the right attitude to
approach conversations with the
regulator like there are people
just as much as you and me I'm sitting
in the office of all of these central
banks but then their incentives are very
different from ours
and what is a the most useful approach
has been
demonstrating technical mechanisms
which satisfy the the requirements and
the interests that the regulators have
you know
we've been able to set up this
cross-border wallet in south africa one
of the most
strictly regulated financial services
markets in the world
by taking the surprise to say like
okay guys we want to do this thing
we know that no one has done it quite
like this before but how do we make it
happen as opposed to
the law says we can't make it happen
you know so i think
you know so I think
by taking that fragmented approach
and investing in those relationships
early
you'll be able to set up and and
scale quite quickly in some of these
markets
there's another question that was
asked by afolabi
in regards to crypto saying for
crypto related companies like chipper
cash will allow users to use btc on app
how do you comply with local regulations
so it's about understanding
what the state of the regulation is in
that market and
adapting as and when things change
before the central bank of nigeria
directive we allowed all of our users in
nigeria to transact
we've since disabled that
functionality for
those nigerian users in order to comply
with the new regulation
in markets like uganda and south africa
where
you don't have an explicit explicit
prohibition
of crypto we're able to run the services
and we are actually trying to help
to formulate some common sense
frameworks that enable
the regulator to to regulate crypto
effectively
and even in markets like nigeria it's
important to note that the prohibition
was
it is not illegal to own or hold
cryptocurrencies
but the the central bank did instruct
centralized exchanges
to not connect to the centralized
banking systems so there's been very
interesting ways that people have
gone around that
sort of like setting up digital and
physical agent networks
and we're exploring some of that in some
of our markets to see whether it might
be a viable alternative
yeah it's interesting i mean one thing
yeah it's interesting I mean one thing
that I'm thinking about as you're
telling that story is that you have to
be able to adapt to sudden change right
you don't necessarily know what's coming
next there's a lot of uncertainty and as
new information comes in you have to
sort of figure out
where to steer and you have to be pretty
nimble so i guess one thing I'm curious
nimble so I guess one thing I'm curious
about from all of you is like what is
the
sort of most unexpected thing that's
happened as you've been building
your company and how did you respond
tori do you want to go go ahead i saw
tori do you want to go go ahead I saw
you come off me
no no go ahead go for it thanks yeah so
there have been like several scenarios
where especially in our earlier days
when we were like operating in certain
markets and we didn't have a very much
for compliance structure
you know we'll be having the time of our
lives all-time highs
incredible volumes and then your partner
processor just calls you and says
we've received the cease and desist
letter to shut down your services
immediately like and it's like at 2
am
right and like there's no explanation
there's no negotiation there's like yeah
you can come and talk about it next week
but like right now
we're seizing and assisting this because
we don't understand exactly what you're
doing
and this happens this has happened to us
quite a lot especially in the year 2019
it's really been a function of not
like really having the right
relationships and
having the right structures in place
to manage these adverse events as and
when they occur
something that is a bit counterintuitive
it's a bit controversial but i'll still
say it anyway
it's my personal belief that a lot of
the the people in power sometimes the
people in positions of power
they might not be there because they
like meritocratically earned that
position right they're not like
the absolute smartest people to be
sitting in that role
due to some other factors maybe there's
like the president's cousin and whatever
else
they're sitting in some you know really
important position in a central bank or
something
now that individual does not necessarily
have the exposure and acumen to be able
to assess the viability of your business
purely on marriage
right and that is like a fundamental
reality of the structures and
institutions that we have
in africa today a lot of people seem not
to pay attention to the fact that
african republics as an idea are about
50 to 60 years old
and you're applying frameworks and
regulatory structures from countries
that have had
institutions for hundreds if not
thousands of years it doesn't really
work the same
so in a scenario like that in that type
of environment it is
really really important that you know
the right people in every country
such that when you get flagged for doing
something those people are able to make
a case on your behalf
to help the other people who might be in
positions of power
to understand that you're not actually
trying to break the law you're trying to
introduce a new level of innovation
which is compliant which is actually
helping some of the government and
the state
actors to achieve their intended targets
and that is a lot easier said than done
but i think you know investing in
but I think you know investing in
relationships and making sure that
you're always communicating
preemptively has been very very
useful in helping us
maintain this type of business across
the continent
I'm gonna jump on that because that's
that's our experience at least the first
part as well when somebody a partner
just calls and says
we noticed this this growth on your
system
and it's become big enough that it's
been flagged by our partners and now
we're gonna have to put a hold on
everything until we understand exactly
what's happening
and and the reaction of course on our
side is well we've been through
compliance we've been through these
conversations this isn't this is not a
surprise
it's great that we're growing that
fast that we you know caused a flip in
your entire system but
that's that shouldn't be the
conversation we're having today
and and so i think that for us it's been
and and so I think that for us it's been
a matter of
intentional duplication within the
system to make sure that
when that happens with one partner we
can very quickly
adapt and shift to another and so making
sure that we are truly an
integrations hub with lots of options to
keep our our operations going and to
provide flexibility for our customers is
really important
and then the other thing that i would
and then the other thing that I would
add i think the the relationships
add I think the the relationships
point is
is spot on those always help no matter
where you are
but also i think there's this there's
but also I think there's this there's
this gap
where again it doesn't matter at the end
of the day
well it doesn't only matter what the law
says or what the regulations say
it matters who is looking at those and
and
how they're interpreting them and so we
before we go into any market spend a lot
of time looking at the regulatory
framework
and what exactly we can do and can't do
and we make sure to comply with that
because
we want to be able to serve customers
and we want to be able to operate and
and
we want to stay within the law but if
you get somebody who
is not in a position where that's part
of their day-to-day job and they don't
understand
exactly what we're doing they don't
understand exactly what a blockchain is
perhaps behind the scenes that's always
a big buzzword
you know they can set people's risk
factors off and so
if that person is the one who is
tasked with
deciding somebody's fate
they usually are not the ones who want
to stick their necks out on the line and
so
making sure that we we understand
exactly what the law says and we're able
to communicate that effectively to
people who probably should know it but
really don't
has been a big challenge for us and i
think we
think we're getting better at it but we
still come across it all the time
yeah it's interesting i mean well joseph
yeah it's interesting I mean well joseph
or rick do you have anything to sort of
add on this topic anything
about the biggest surprises how you've
dealt with them now for
for us it's been similar similar
examples
similar fears of shutting down
an account and i think especially for
an account and I think especially for
sort for
fintechs in in especially in africa
is that it's quite important
when when the product is evolving that
you you keep flexibility
in your product and because yeah those
things are
unfortunately there and yeah if you
you
you can't respond quick enough
that that means that yeah it can kill
your business for a while
so flexibility is definitely
something you need to have as a fintech
yeah definitely so in in in an area
for my life i i was the co-founder of
for my life I was the co-founder of
the fintech
and these experiences are very like very
similar
where you have partners just
basically
in in you know in in our case
you know we our customers just couldn't
do a transaction anymore a certain kind
of trans
transaction anymore and then you know we
reach out to our partners and like oh we
you know we cut you off because you know
this
the central bank reached out and you
know and so
yeah it's it's being able to you know
have multiple partners
constantly like wizard said you know
constantly being
like you know build relationships
with both regulators and your partners
such that
you know it's easy to overcome you know
times like this but
yeah generally they'll just always come
up you almost can't avoid them
yeah i guess the the this is also sort
yeah I guess the the this is also sort
of a general question right
if so far we've sort of been talking
about the solutions that you built and
the customers that you serve
but i think there's also people in the
but I think there's also people in the
audience who are sort of budding
entrepreneurs who are interested in
hearing about your experiences actually
building a fintech and
you know being able to like sort of
respond to unexpected circumstances
to be flexible that that seems like
part of it but i guess
part of it but I guess
I'm also interested in any advice that
you would have for someone who's
interested in starting
a fintech company or who's interested in
scaling one that they've started
like what what's like sort of the is
there
is there a number one thing that you
would suggest to keep in mind if you're
trying to build your own business
yeah i can i can mention a thing
yeah I can I can mention a thing
it doesn't only fit on fintech
businesses for for starting businesses
in general
don't don't try to be
don't try to be everything and and do
everything
and i think
in the fintech it's it's more important
because you need to
take off quite some boxes like
regulation you need to have
a partner if you if you're doing
anything with
financial activity
often yeah you need to
need various of elements in your
business to together to work and i think
business to together to work and I think
what is important there is to really
look okay
what is your what is your core business
like where are you get in
as a starting fintech business and try
to
outsource us as much as possible so yeah
don't try to build your own
kyc aml solutions there are multiple
players in the market
and then that's for those other
activities as well try to
focus on your on your core
and and yeah utilize
your existing existing solutions in the
in the market
of course that's a little bit different
when you when you grow but i think it's
when you when you grow but I think it's
it's
very important to do that in the
beginning
i think mine would be similar to that
I think mine would be similar to that
along the lines of the core business
team
i think i would just say for someone
I think I would just say for someone
starting ventucker otherwise but
especially fintech
know the details because there's so
much that technology can do
these days that we often forget
why we're doing things or or what we
need
to really be successful we see success
stories in the news every day and it
seems like
you could throw any tech solution at the
wall and something would stick
but i think that especially for
but I think that especially for
fintech being in a highly regulated
space especially for building in
markets that might not have
as robust of an environment whether
that's africa or somewhere else
it really does come down to knowing the
details so knowing the details of your
customers
and their ux ui preferences and
their their needs on a day-to-day basis
and their comfort level with technology
knowing the regulatory landscape knowing
your partner's comfort level with risk
and any any stipulations that
they might have to adhere to or that
they might be under so i
i think that the details are where it
I think that the details are where it
can fall apart or succeed greatly but
knowing them
enables you to set up a business that
has a much higher chance of success
and then be able to effectively defend
those decisions
over time because if you're building in
the fintech landscape
you're going to have to defend every
single one of the thousands of decisions
that you make on a day-to-day basis to
potential investors and partners and
regulators and customers
and anyone else who touches your
ecosystem so i think as much as you can
ecosystem so I think as much as you can
know
and be able to defend that the better
joseph orweeza you want to touch this
one
well oh very you know very similar
it's and it's like like rick said
it's
beyond just fintechs right it's
basically
knowing like knowing your you know your
product knowing what you're trying to
build
i think one of the
I think one of the
one of the best ways to put it will
be to
build the product first before the
business right
it's a bit tricky in a fintech
especially with regulation and stuff
but it's mainly in a way
you i i believe that you still have
you I believe that you still have
you have some room to ask for
forgiveness
you know before begging for
permission right
and so for as much as you can play
i'll say like you know just get make
sure that you have a solid understanding
like tori said
of of the product you're trying to build
of your users
of what they want of what is really
important to them
and in the same vein almost at the
same time
work on building very strong
relationships with you know partners
your relationship with partners will
probably
in many cases make or break you it's
very important that you make sure that
those relationships are strong and
in many cases they'll protect you
especially if you're like you know a
fintech starting out
most of your partners are probably going
to be the ones to protect you from
you know like heavy hits from regulators
right
so making sure those relationships are
you know
are really tight and i think
are really tight and I think
wizard referenced you know kind of
finding out what their motivations are
and then you know walking around those
just as opposed to
beyond just regulators just your
partners know where your partner's
motivations are and make sure that you
know you're working with them
you know to achieve whatever they also
want to achieve while you're achieving
what you want to achieve
so basically yeah
is that anything to add no i think
is that anything to add no I think
between what tori and joseph have shared
they have captured
all of my ideas great i mean one thing i
all of my ideas great I mean one thing i
think about as
as you're discussing all this is i think
as you're discussing all this is I think
okay the Stellar network is a great
back-end platform for sort of storing
and transferring value and ideally
in my mind at the sitting here at the
Stellar development foundation i imagine
Stellar development foundation I imagine
that
all these different organizations
ecosystem participants would build on
the network
and be able to like interoperate right
to be able to work with one another
to forge partnerships to make payments
across borders and across currencies
but i also realized that that's a sort
but I also realized that that's a sort
of you know that's
my utopian vision of how Stellar should
work
and I'm curious about
your views on interoperating with other
people in the Stellar ecosystem or
in sort of the fintech ecosystem in
general how important
is it that your sort of solutions that
you're building play well with others
and what are the biggest chat like
doesn't do they currently
and if and whether they do or not like
sort of what are the biggest
challenges to interoperation
i have a bunch of thoughts on this
I have a bunch of thoughts on this
one so i think
one so I think
interoperability is like the next big
barrier for
digital financial services across the
continent
we have seen relatively high penetration
in terms of especially urban centers
but like you know we still have a long
way to go in digitizing finance right
network international who operates
probably the largest point-of-sale
terminal network for banks across the
continent
their latest data from last year
indicates that 93
of transactions across the continent
retail transactions are still in cash
so all of this fintech we're doing is
lovely and the volumes are impressive
but like
we have a long way to go that's one now
another side of that bucket is that
different countries
have got fragmented solutions on a per
country
basis so even in individual markets
native interoperability
is not yet where it needs to be there
are a few notable examples tanzania has
got really good interrupt uganda
so and so I'm not sure about the latest
in rwanda maybe tory can chime in there
but there's there's still quite a lot of
work to be done on a on a national
level
once we have the national systems all
of the digital financial systems
interoperable
and and I'm pleased to see that over the
last three years
a lot of the bank and mobile money
interoperability problems
in east africa and southern africa have
have been solved quite well
but once we have that national
interoperability the next question is
now around like international
transactions interoperability
and it was i think actually this week
and it was I think actually this week
that afri exim bank
is piloting a continental payment system
that is going to be used to facilitate
a trade of intra-africa currency
pairs like the ones that i described
pairs like the ones that I described
earlier
this is consistent with the african
continental free trade areas
policy towards unifying africa towards a
single market
so i do think that like you know
so I do think that like you know
interoperability
is is probably the most important thing
we have to do at this stage it doesn't
matter if
you know my money is sitting in cheaper
and and tori has hers in leave
why can't i send my money from my
why can't I send my money from my
chipper wallet to to tory's
leaf wallet we both support the ron and
frank we both support
the kenyan shipping we have a long way
to go some of the
the standards that are being developed
such as moja loop
could be something that's quite exciting
but again they're targeted towards
specific verticals that is the telco
industry we're over the top financial
service players
if we don't do interoperability we'll
end up with a scenario where
you've got many monopolies in various
regions which is almost the status quo
to date
so definitely something that needs to
happen i think that blockchains are an
happen I think that blockchains are an
obvious solution towards
interoperability i just haven't seen
interoperability I just haven't seen
i think that the biggest barrier the
I think that the biggest barrier the
technology exists today
but the biggest barrier is fintechs in
africa don't have like a unified
association
the way the telcos do so moja loop is
being pushed to the telcos
through the gsma which is the industry
association the first thing we need to
do
is unionize and bring out an association
of over the top of financial service
players and then agree on what sort of
standards we're going to use
for interoperability i don't think it's
for interoperability I don't think it's
been as much of an issue in other
markets because europe has got the
eurozone
so if the currency is natively
interoperable you don't have to worry
the united states is a single market
china is also a single market
india is also a single market but we
compare ourselves with these
regions and meanwhile we are 54 very
distinct and very unique
countries with unique needs challenges
and opportunities
so definitely i think the next unicorns
so definitely I think the next unicorns
are going to be
interoperability platforms out of africa
and it's a fantastic
opportunity for those who are willing to
give it a shot in solving
i i completely agree with that i think
I I completely agree with that I think
the fragmented markets that you
mentioned
are the biggest opportunities as well
so if the telcos are not going to solve
that
you know in rwanda today it's very
difficult to send between mtn
and airtel if they're not going to
solve it for themselves because
of the the competition between those
then that's an incredible opportunity
for somebody like leaf or tripper or
other fintech plays to come in and solve
it for them so
i've i've been excited to see that there
are definitely companies stepping into
those gaps i think they've started at
those gaps I think they've started at
the business level so the b2b plays
that's that's been a lot easier and
then hopefully the
benefits of interoperability and
bridge plays will come down to the
consumer level
over time that's that's where leaf is
trying to play of course
and we see significant opportunity there
and i i genuinely hope that others will
and I genuinely hope that others will
come into the space as well because
it is it is such a fragmented market and
there is so much opportunity
i think one thing that
I think one thing that
is a potential barrier to
interoperability is the word itself
and so i don't know if it's i don't
and so I don't know if it's I don't
know if it's helpful
just to start with talking about
integrations everybody loves
integrations right they're easy we know
how to do them
they're very accessible for most
companies and so
if instead of going into you know a room
full of people and saying hey let's all
become interoperable
if it's having those conversations to
say how can you and i integrate today
say how can you and I integrate today
and over time that creates a network
fantastic
it'll help us get there and so for
myself you know i look at it and I'm
myself you know I look at it and I'm
like well
great we already have assets for rondon
frank's canyon shillings uganda
shillings on the Stellar network
that's very easy for us to to push into
chipper's wallet for example so
you know if we want to have a
conversation after this and talk about
what that looks like
great because we already have that
asset i think that my
asset I think that my
my fear in this is that we keep abiding
by the same playbook
over time and so it's you know leaf leaf
created these assets because we didn't
see anybody else out there who
had them but you know that's
that could also be justified for other
companies coming into the space you know
if they're a new company in rwanda that
have wanted to have their own
rondon frank coin on Stellar they could
do that it's unnecessary they should
just use ours and we should learn how to
play nicely together but
but i understand the business reasoning
but I understand the business reasoning
and the fear that could create
that landscape where everyone just
continues to do their own thing
so i think we are very very pro
so I think we are very very pro
integration
and very pro interoperability Stellar
is a good tool for that and i think as
is a good tool for that and I think as
the network is still fairly limited
in in africa but it's growing and we
hope that
you know by sharing our experiences and
our lessons learned there's been a lot
of them
potentially we can help other players
coming into that space as we're growing
ourselves because of course
we're still very new in the game as well
great i mean joseph do you have
great I mean joseph do you have
something to add to that
yeah so i i really like
yeah so I really like
taurus points on integrations
that's that's actually
that seems to be like a more or kind
of like
friendly approach one
one thing so we talked about mojo loop
and so i've been kind of involved with
with that movement for a bit one of
the issues you see
is many com many you know startups that
should adopt it
all are looking to adopt it to realize
that
for example you probably need to have
like a switch
right in nigeria it's going to cost
you a lot of money
to have like a switching license right
and then
you have this thing where the startups
say they want to come together
and then build like one switch that they
can use to connect like you know moja
loop in another country
there's like all that kind of
complexity
around it and so just starting with
integration seems to me like a very like
you know fair approach like you know as
much as possible if lots of startups you
know puts together
the exposed apis like to connect to each
other
then maybe that's that'll be like a
great start
and then we can start talking about you
know
connecting across different brothers
like countries so that that looks that
sounds very
you know plausible to me
yeah i wanted to add to that that will
yeah I wanted to add to that that will
be interesting to
to see a couple of players in in the
african market that actually
try to to become such a
central switch for example mfs africa
is trying to do that
and then on the other side you have of
course Stellar
which is try to achieve that in a
decentralized way
with with as a non-profit having a
certain
open source standards it will be
interesting to see
yeah which way it's gonna
it's going to lean whether it will be
more with a central party
or it will go decentralized
and i think it will take a bit of
and I think it will take a bit of
time but
expect that that at some point it will
lean more
decentralized on for example Stellar
open source
and having open source standards and
actually
yeah a central party or that's at least
what i hope
what I hope
because if it becomes a central party
one or two players then it's
the question whether it really becomes
cheaper
great thank you so i i personally
great thank you so I personally
feel like that's a great place to end
this sort of dream of hope
that these standards for integrations
become
you know sort of tend towards the open
source of course as
someone at the sdf who is prizes for the
open source culture and believes
that this network should be
permissionless and owned by everyone and
easily accessible and that we should
work together to create similar
standards
rather than having one single party own
them that sounds great to me
and i would love to see that happen but
and I would love to see that happen but
of course you know what is interesting
is that what happens next is up to the
people here and the people listening
people in the world in general the
people who are building businesses
and also to their users like what is
going to succeed and i think
going to succeed and I think
only time will tell but
at this point i do want to take these
at this point I do want to take these
last few minutes because as i mentioned
last few minutes because as I mentioned
at the top of the presentation or at the
top of the panel
we the sdf are working with dfs
lab to sponsor a bootcamp
and i just want to take these last few
and I just want to take these last few
minutes so that anyone to give some
information so that anyone listening
understands what that means
what it can do for them and how to apply
and so i want to
and so I want to
thank everyone for their participation
thank you so much
and pass it over to joseph so he can
tell us a little bit about the boot camp
yeah thanks justin so
we're working so dfs lab is working with
the Stellar development foundation
it's to kind of open up an opportunity
for
early to mid-stage startups who are
interested
in building a solution for on stella
who are interested in building on stella
for africa
we are looking you know
at basically it's it
they block the bootcamp follows like a
you know design sprint approach where
over a period of three days you go from
you know idea to prototype
in
where you you follow a bunch of steps
right to go from idea to prototype
by three-day period and then we have
demo day on the fourth day where
startups
or participants can win you know
anywhere from five thousand to twenty
thousand usdc
in prices so
the most promising startups you know
during the event
and there are also opportunities for
follow-up funding
from the Stellar development
foundation enterprise fund
and other investors who
at the boots got the demo day right
and then and it's kind of open to
fintechs open to companies that are
currently building on the blockchain
and then companies that are just you
know you know thinking of it
like the way we refer to them as
cryptocurious companies who are building
in africa
it's open to so to any of those type
of people to
to apply you can visit the websites
that
you see on the screen right now
the link on the screen to apply
applications clues on the 20th of
august
and yeah if you have any questions about
it
feel free to email me that's joseph
dfslab.net
but I'm fairly positive like you know
you have all the information you need on
on the website
so please feel free to apply we're
looking forward to having you
during the event
great yeah thanks everyone so obviously
as joseph said you can visit that link
on the screen to find out more you can
email
joseph dfslab.net
applications as it says close august
20th and
our goal here is to sort of help support
and incubate projects in africa that are
focused on
fintech solutions that solve real-world
problems
and that's that's the end i really want
and that's that's the end I really want
to say that this was it was a real
privilege to have
all four of you here thank you so much i
know that we just scratched the surface
but i feel like we started to get into
but I feel like we started to get into
some interesting areas
and to talk about you know what's
going on in the region in
integrations and also i think there
integrations and also I think there
was some really interesting nuggets for
people who are interested in building
their own
companies or scaling their own companies
so i really appreciate it and
so I really appreciate it and
i hope that everyone out there listening
I hope that everyone out there listening
also came away with something
we do plan to have more of these
ecosystem roundtables in the future
so you can always find out more about
those by just going to `stellar.org`
events thanks everyone for participating
and for watching
bye
you